The Best Coquito Recipe (Puerto Rican Coconut Rum Cocktail)
Vanessa
6–8 minutes

Coquito is a favorite from Puerto Rico. This eggnog-like drink, prepared with coconut milk, is traditionally served on Nochebuena (Christmas Eve). It’s easy and quick to make, wonderfully creamy, and perfectly festive.

The festivities run all the way up to New Year’s, but my favorite of all is Nochebuena (Christmas Eve). On this day, families get together for a big home gathering with lots of food, drinks, music, dancing, and overall fun. This is one delicious sip with its creamy texture, warming flavors from the spices, and delicate coconut flavor.
Three glasses with coconut eggnog next to a striped cloth.
What is Coquito?

Coquito is a Puerto Rican eggnog-like drink prepared with coconut milk that is traditionally served on Nochebuena. There are many variations to this drink, but the base ingredients are always the same: Coconut milk, coconut cream, sweetened condensed milk, cinnamon, nutmeg, and Caribbean Rum.

For this recipe, I used evaporated milk, sweet condensed milk, coconut milk, coconut cream, and Bacardi light rum. For the spices, I used cinnamon and nutmeg and added a little vanilla extract for some extra flavor.

I did not use eggs because I wanted to keep the recipe light and simple.
Why You’ll Love This Recipe?

It’s incredibly easy to make, no cooking required, and comes together in just minutes, making it a hassle-free addition to your holiday festivities. This Puerto Rican coconut eggnog combines the tropical sweetness of coconut with aromatic spices and the warmth of rum, creating a luxurious beverage perfect for festive gatherings.

Its velvety texture and rich flavor make it an instant favorite, and you can easily tailor it to your taste, whether you prefer it extra creamy, spicier, or alcohol-free. With its ability to be prepared ahead of time, Coquito is a stress-free crowd-pleaser that will elevate your holiday celebrations while introducing a delicious piece of Puerto Rican culture to your home.
Overhead shot of three glasses of coquito.
How to make this coquito drink

In a blender, combine condensed milk, evaporated milk, coconut milk, and coconut cream. Add the cinnamon, nutmeg, and vanilla. Finally, add the rum. Blend until all is well combined.

Pour into glass bottles, seal tightly, and refrigerate. Shake the mixture well before serving. Serve cold in small drink glasses and garnish with a sprinkle of cinnamon or nutmeg, or place cinnamon sticks into glasses.
Three small glasses next to a bottle of coconut eggnog.
Serving Coquito

Serve your coquito cold in small drink glasses, add a sprinkle of cinnamon or nutmeg on the top, and enjoy. I prefer not to add ice as it dilutes the drink. If you are serving a larger crowd, you can pour it into a pitcher and let everyone help themselves!
Coquito Variations

You can easily make different-flavored coquitos. Make my chocolate coquito by adding in some dark chocolate, or try making different flavors like pistachio or strawberry! This is a great base recipe to add your own twist! I prefer not to add cloves to my coquito recipe, but add a little pinch if you like the flavor.
Storage Tips

Once you have blended together all your ingredients, pour the drink into sealable mason jars or bottles. Close the lid and keep it refrigerated until ready to serve.
Three glasses and a bottle of coquito next to a red and white cloth.
Frequently Asked Questions

Does Coquito have eggs?

Some coquitos do use egg, though I prefer it without. Omitting the eggs means that the drink also has a longer shelf life, so it’s perfect to enjoy across the holiday season.

What’s the difference between Coquito and Eggnog?

Coquito doesn’t contain any sugar as you get the sweetness from the condensed milk and coconut cream. It’s similar in many ways but has more of a tropical flavor.

Which rum should I use for this drink?

Light rum, also known as silver or white rum, is ideal for this coquito recipe. It is filtered several times and is very light in color and flavor, so it doesn’t overpower the flavor of the coconut and spices.

Can Coquito be made without Rum?

To make a virgin coquito, you can leave out the rum to make a kid-friendly holiday drink. It will still taste creamy and delicious, but without the alcohol.

How long does Coquito last?

Because my Puerto Rican coconut eggnog is made without eggs, it has a longer shelf life and is a great make-ahead holiday drink. It will keep well in the fridge for up to a week, so it’s a great make-ahead drink to enjoy throughout the holidays.
Recipe Notes and Tips

    If your blender is a regular-sized blender like mine, you will have to separate it into two batches and pour it into a large pitcher as you go.
    Leftovers can be kept refrigerated for about a week.
    Use light rum in this recipe, not dark.

More Drinks Recipes

    Pomegranate Holiday Sangria
    Cranberry Mojito
    Grapefruit Lime Margaritas
    Black and White Bourbon Milkshake

Three glasses with coconut eggnog next to a striped cloth.

my dominican kitchen logo
Coquito (Coconut Eggnog)

Author: Vanessa

Learn how to make the perfect coquito, a delicious Puerto Rican holiday drink made with coconut, rum, and spices. This easy recipe will be a hit at any party!

4.63 from 190 votes

Prep Time 5 minutes

Cook Time 10 minutes

Total Time 15 minutes

Course Cocktail, Drinks

Cuisine Latino, Puerto Rican

Servings 20 servings

Calories 288 kcal

    ▢ 14 oz (1 can) sweet condensed milk
    ▢ 12 oz (1 can) evaporated milk
    ▢ 13.5 oz (1 can), unsweetened, coconut milk
    ▢ 15 oz (1 can) cream of coconut
    ▢ 1 teaspoon cinnamon
    ▢ 1 teaspoon nutmeg
    ▢ 2 teaspoons vanilla extract
    ▢ 2 1/2 cups light rum

    In a blender, combine condense milk, evaporated milk, coconut milk and coconut cream.

    Add the cinnamon, nutmeg, and vanilla.

    Finally, add the rum. Blend until all is well combined.

    Pour into glass bottles, seal tightly, and refrigerate.

    Serve cold in small drink glasses and garnish with a sprinkle of cinnamon or nutmeg. Shake well before serving.

    If your blender is a regular size blender like mine, you will have to separate in two batches and pour into a large pitcher as you go.
    Leftovers can be kept refrigerated for about a week.
    Use light rum in this recipe, not dark.

Calories: 288kcalCarbohydrates: 28gProtein: 3gFat: 11gSaturated Fat: 9gCholesterol: 12mgSodium: 57mgPotassium: 167mgFiber: 1gSugar: 27gVitamin A: 94IUVitamin C: 1mgCalcium: 105mgIron: 1mg

The nutritional information of this recipe and all recipes on mydominicankitchen.com is only an estimate. The accuracy of any recipe on this site is not guaranteed.