How to Make Puerto Rican Water Bread (Pan de Agua)
Hector Rodriguez
7–8 minutes

By

Hector Rodriguez

A Puerto Rico native and former food service professional, Hector Rodriguez develops recipes inspired by the Caribbean and Latin America.

Updated on 08/3/25

Tested by

Diana Rattray

Diana Rattray

Southern-cuisine expert and cookbook author Diana Rattray has created more than 5,000 recipes and articles in her 20 years as a food writer.

(208)

The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

208 ratings

    This bread becomes a staple with its light and airy texture, perfect for breakfast or snacks.
    Starting with a cold oven gives the bread an extra crispy crust and soft center.

Pan de agua, or water bread, is a common bread found in the Caribbean that is well-loved by Puerto Ricans, Cubans, and Dominicans. In the Dominican Republic, pan de agua comes in small round rolls, while in Cuba and Puerto Rico it takes the form of French-inspired loaves. For Puerto Ricans, this bread is the staple of their breakfasts and snacks. There's nothing like biting into a fresh slice of crusty, warm pan de agua while you sip a strong café con leche first thing in the morning.

Ideal for sandwiches and delicious with fresh butter, this is an easy bread to make and you won't regret the time investment. The result is a bread with a hard and crispy crust and a fluffy and airy center that you'll fall in love with. So, grab your ingredients and get baking!
Start Cold for a Crispy Crust

    Similar to French or Italian bread, pan de agua is made from the same basic ingredients, but the baking process is different. Have you heard of placing a loaf of bread in a cold oven? Well, this might be the first time you do it, but it won't be the last.
    The proofed dough is placed in a cold oven and is set above a pan of boiling water.
    The bread continues to rise as the oven heats up, causing the crust to become deliciously thin and crisp.

Properly Proofed Dough

    Depending on the container or bowl, it can be difficult to visually tell when the dough has "doubled in size."
    To check the dough, poke two lightly floured fingers about an inch into the dough. The indentations should remain.
    If the dough springs back and fills the indentations in within a minute or two, it isn't ready.

What you'll need to make this pan de agua recipe
Never Lose a Recipe Again!

Love a Spruce Eats recipe? With MyRecipes, your personal home for recipes, easily save and organize your favorites, plus thousands more, in one convenient place.

"This was a soft, chewy bread, and very easy to make with a few basic ingredients. There's no added fat except for the oil or butter to grease the bowl or proofing container. The bread has nice flavor and it will make excellent sandwiches." —Diana Rattray

Puerto Rican Water Bread Tester Image

Keep Screen Awake

For the Dough:

    1 (0.25-ounce) packet active dry yeast (2 1/4 teaspoons)

    1 tablespoon sugar

    2 cups (473 milliliters) warm water

    1 tablespoon salt

    5 cups (709 grams) all-purpose flour, plus more for dusting

    1 teaspoon vegetable oil

    2 tablespoons cornmeal, or flour

For the Egg Wash:

    2 large egg whites

    1 tablespoon water

For Baking:

    1 cup water, boiling

Make the Dough

    Gather the ingredients.

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

    In a large bowl, quickly mix together 1 packet active dry yeast, 1 tablespoon sugar, and 2 cups warm water. Cover the mixture and let it stand for about 20 minutes until the yeast starts foaming on top.

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

    In a separate bowl, mix 1 tablespoon salt and 5 cups all-purpose flour. 

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

    Stir the flour mixture into the yeast mixture, 1 cup at a time. The dough will begin to form as you add the flour. 

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

    Once the dough is malleable and you have added all of the flour, transfer it to a floured surface and knead it for 10 to 15 minutes. It should become elastic and no longer sticky. If you're using a standing mixer with a dough hook, 8 to 12 minutes should be enough to get a good consistency.

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

    Grease a large bowl with 1 teaspoon vegetable oil and place the ball of kneaded dough inside. Turn the dough so it's oily all over. Cover the bowl with a clean kitchen towel and let it rise for 1 1/2 to 2 hours, or until doubled in size.

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

Shape the Dough

    Flour a work area and divide the proofed dough into 2 equal portions. Knead them into separate long loaves, about 12 to 14 inches long.

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

    Sprinkle 2 tablespoons cornmeal or flour on a baking sheet and place the loaves on top. Use a sharp knife to make 3 to 4 slashes along the top of each.

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

    Mix together 2 egg whites and 1 tablespoon water to make the egg wash. Brush the egg wash on top of the loaves. 

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

Bake the Loaves

    Put the loaves on the center rack of a cold oven. Place a shallow baking pan on the rack below the loaves. Fill the shallow pan with the boiling water.

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

    Wait 10 minutes. Turn the oven to 400 F. Bake the loaves for 35 minutes. Their internal temperature should reach 200 F, and they should be golden and a bit crusty. Enjoy.

    The Spruce / Abbey Littlejohn

How to Store and Freeze

Pan de agua is made without fat or preservatives so it goes stale quickly, so it's best enjoyed the day it's baked. However:

    If you want to save the second loaf until the next day, cover it as securely as possible with plastic wrap. Warm it up in the microwave for a few seconds before serving it.
    For longer storage, wrap the loaves tightly in plastic wrap and place them in zip-top freezer bags. Freeze the bread for up to two months. To use, thaw overnight in the refrigerator, slice, and toast.

Nutrition Facts (per serving)
155 	Calories
1g 	Fat
32g 	Carbs
5g 	Protein

×
Nutrition Facts
Servings: 16
Amount per serving
Calories 	155
% Daily Value*
Total Fat 1g 	1%
Saturated Fat 0g 	1%
Cholesterol 0mg 	0%
Sodium 407mg 	18%
Total Carbohydrate 32g 	11%
Dietary Fiber 1g 	4%
Total Sugars 1g
Protein 5g
Vitamin C 0mg 	0%
Calcium 8mg 	1%
Iron 2mg 	10%
Potassium 56mg 	1%
*The % Daily Value (DV) tells you how much a nutrient in a food serving contributes to a daily diet. 2,000 calories a day is used for general nutrition advice.

(Nutrition information is calculated using an ingredient database and should be considered an estimate.)

Rate This Recipe

I don't like this at all. It's not the worst. Sure, this will do. I'm a fan—would recommend. Amazing! I love it! Thanks for your rating!
